1. Front Neurosci. 2019 Jan 31;13:25. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00025. eCollection 
2019.

Neurons and Microglia; A Sickly-Sweet Duo in Diabetic Pain Neuropathy.

Rajchgot T(1), Thomas SC(1), Wang JC(2), Ahmadi M(1), Balood M(1), Crosson T(1), 
Dias JP(3), Couture R(1), Claing A(1), Talbot S(1).

Author information:
(1)Département de Pharmacologie et Physiologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université 
de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(2)Graduate Institute of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, 
Diabetes and Metabolism, Baltimore, MD, United States.

Diabetes is a common condition characterized by persistent hyperglycemia. High 
blood sugar primarily affects cells that have a limited capacity to regulate 
their glucose intake. These cells include capillary endothelial cells in the 
retina, mesangial cells in the renal glomerulus, Schwann cells, and neurons of 
the peripheral and central nervous systems. As a result, hyperglycemia leads to 
largely intractable complications such as retinopathy, nephropathy, 
hypertension, and neuropathy. Diabetic pain neuropathy is a complex and 
multifactorial disease that has been associated with poor glycemic control, 
longer diabetes duration, hypertension, advanced age, smoking status, 
hypoinsulinemia, and dyslipidemia. While many of the driving factors involved in 
diabetic pain are still being investigated, they can be broadly classified as 
either neuron -intrinsic or -extrinsic. In neurons, hyperglycemia impairs the 
polyol pathway, leading to an overproduction of reactive oxygen species and 
reactive nitrogen species, an enhanced formation of advanced glycation end 
products, and a disruption in Na+/K+ ATPase pump function. In terms of the 
extrinsic pathway, hyperglycemia leads to the generation of both overactive 
microglia and microangiopathy. The former incites a feed-forward inflammatory 
loop that hypersensitizes nociceptor neurons, as observed at the onset of 
diabetic pain neuropathy. The latter reduces neurons' access to oxygen, glucose 
and nutrients, prompting reductions in nociceptor terminal expression and losses 
in sensation, as observed in the later stages of diabetic pain neuropathy. 
Overall, microglia can be seen as potent and long-lasting amplifiers of 
nociceptor neuron activity, and may therefore constitute a potential therapeutic 
target in the treatment of diabetic pain neuropathy.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2019.00025
PMCID: PMC6365454
PMID: 30766472