1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2018 Mar 19;6:18. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2018.00018. 
eCollection 2018.

Recent Insights into the Contribution of the Changing Hypertrophic Chondrocyte 
Phenotype in the Development and Progression of Osteoarthritis.

Ripmeester EGJ(1), Timur UT(1), Caron MMJ(1), Welting TJM(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Experimental Orthopedics, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, 
Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands.

Osteoarthritis (OA) is an extremely prevalent age-related condition. The 
economic and societal burden due to the cost of symptomatic treatment, inability 
to work, joint replacement, and rehabilitation is huge and increasing. 
Currently, there are no effective medical therapies that delay or reverse the 
pathological manifestations of OA. Current treatment options are, without 
exception, focused on slowing down progression of the disease to postpone total 
joint replacement surgery for as long as possible and keeping the associated 
pain and joint immobility manageable. Alterations in the articular cartilage 
chondrocyte phenotype might be fundamental in the pathological mechanisms of OA 
development. In many ways, the changing chondrocyte phenotype in osteoarthritic 
cartilage resembles the process of endochondral ossification as seen, for 
instance, in developing growth plates. However, the relative contribution of 
endochondral ossification to the changing chondrocyte phenotype in the 
development and progression of OA remains poorly described. In this review, we 
will discuss the current knowledge regarding the cartilage endochondral 
phenotypic changes occurring during OA development and progression, as well as 
the molecular and environmental effectors driving these changes. Understanding 
how these molecular mechanisms determine the chondrocyte cell fate in OA will be 
essential in enabling cartilage regenerative approaches in future treatments of 
OA.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2018.00018
PMCID: PMC5867295
PMID: 29616218