Rab7
Rab7 is a small GTPase of the Rab family, first identified in a rat liver cell line (Bucci et al., 1988). Rab7 is localized to late endosomes and lysosomes and regulates late endocytic traffic. It is thus a key protein for the biogenesis of lysosomes and phagolysosomes, and for the maturation of late autophagic vacuoles (Bucci et al., 2000; Harrison et al., 2003; Jager et al., 2004) (Figs. 3 and 4). Rab7 is also important for cell nutrition and apoptosis (Edinger et al., 2003; Snider, 2003) (Fig. 4).
A number of Rab7 effector proteins have been identified. For instance, Rab7 recruits RILP (Rab-interacting lysosomal protein) on endosomal membranes, which in turn recruits the dynein/dynactin complex, thereby allowing microtubule minus-end-mediated transport of endosomes and lysosomes (Cantalupo et al., 2001; Harrison et al., 2003; Johansson et al., 2007). Also, FYCO1 (FYVE and coiled-coil domain containing 1) forms a complex with Rab7 and directs plus-end transport of autophagosomes along microtubules (Pankiv et al., 2010). Rab7 also recruits the retromer complex to endosomes, and interacts with hVps34/p150 regulating PI 3-kinase activity in the endo-lysosomal pathway (Rojas et al., 2008; Stein et al., 2003).

Given the importance of this small GTPase in many cellular functions (Fig. 4) and its multiple interactions, it is not surprising that Rab7 mutations underlie neuronal diseases. Indeed, four missense mutations in the rab7 gene on chromosome 3q21 are associated with CMT2B (Chiariello et al., 1998; Houlden et al., 2004; Meggouh et al., 2006; Verhoeven et al., 2003a). The four CMT2B-causing Rab7 mutant proteins have been characterized biochemically and show very similar biochemical properties (De Luca et al., 2008; Spinosa et al., 2008). Indeed, they have increased Koff for nucleotides, and these altered nucleotide dissociation rates in turn negatively affect GTPase activity per binding event (De Luca et al., 2008; Spinosa et al., 2008). In particular, the GDP dissociation rate is strongly increased and, accordingly, the mutant proteins are predominantly in the GTP-bound form (De Luca et al., 2008; Spinosa et al., 2008). In addition, their activation is not dependent on GEFs, and they show enhanced interaction with a number of effector proteins (McCray et al., 2010; Spinosa et al., 2008). Furthermore, they are able to rescue Rab7 function following Rab7 silencing, suggesting that they behave as active mutant proteins (De Luca et al., 2008; Spinosa et al., 2008).

Conclusions and future directions
Several neuropathies are caused by functional alterations of intracellular traffic proteins. We have reviewed here the known genetic causes of CMT neuropathy, highlighting genes with functions related, directly or indirectly, to intracellular trafficking. Interestingly, many CMT disease-associated mutations alter genes involved in the regulation of the endomembrane system, strongly suggesting ‘problems in intracellular trafficking’ to be a major cause of CMT neuropathy (Fig. 4). Although each gene has more than one role in the cell, these genes can be grouped on the basis of the function most likely to be altered and, thus, most likely to constitute the basis of the molecular mechanism of action underlying the neuropathy (Table 2). CMT disease-associated mutations in the proteins indicated in Table 2 alter the regulation of PI metabolism, cytoskeletal organization and transport, endosomal trafficking, protein degradation, mitochondrial dynamics and mitochondrial axonal transport (Table 2; Fig. 4). However, other CMT disease-associated proteins could also be involved in the regulation of membrane traffic, although indirectly. For example, defects in PRS1 could alter the availability of nucleotides and thus affect the Rab and/or Rho GTPase cycle, impairing membrane traffic or cytoskeleton organization. Altered ARHGEF10 function could affect the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton and thus, indirectly, trafficking. To date, more than 40 different genes have been linked to CMT neuropathy. In the near future, due to the introduction of next generation sequencing systems, it is very likely that many other genes – which may be mutated in only a few individuals – will be identified.

Axon repair, axon growth and axon regeneration are processes that are dynamically dependent on cytoskeletal reorganization and intracellular trafficking events (Bloom and Morgan, 2011). For correct axon regeneration, it is important to maintain axon polarity, to initiate growth cone formation, and to promote outgrowth and correct synapse formation. All these steps require iterative events of endocytosis and exocytosis and extensive cytoskeletal reorganization (Bloom and Morgan, 2011). Thus, the CMT disease-causing proteins involved in intracellular trafficking and cytoskeletal organization (Table 2; Fig. 4) could affect axonal regeneration by affecting one or more intracellular trafficking events necessary for this process.

Figure 4
Intracellular trafficking proteins involved in CMT neuropathy. DNM2 regulates vesicle budding. KIF1B controls vesicle motility on microtubules. LITAF/SIMPLE and LRSAM are present in the endocytic pathway and probably regulate protein degradation. Myotubularin-related proteins (MTMR2 and MTMR13) and FIG4 regulate PI metabolism at the level of early endosomes and late endosomes, respectively. Rab7 is present on late endosomes and regulates transport to lysosomes. SH3TC2 regulates endosomal recycling together with Rab11, while NDRG1 regulates membrane traffic at the level of early endosomes together with Rab4 and PRA1. HSPs regulate proteasomal degradation and associate with neurofilaments and actin filaments. FGD4 associates with and regulates actin filaments. MFN2 and GDAP regulate mitochondrial dynamics and mitochondrial axonal transport.