Introduction
When investigating the effect of estrogens on EOC cells, it is of note that these tumors occur predominately in postmenopausal women, at a time when the de novo synthesis of the most active form of estrogen, 17β-estradiol (E2), in the ovary has ceased. However, cells in the ovary and other estrogen-sensitive tissues, such as the endometrium and breast, remain exposed to E2 provided from circulating estrogen precursors, particularly estrone sulfate (E1S), taken up from the circulation via specific transport proteins, including members of the organic anion transporting polypeptide family (Fig. 1) (11). A study by Sasano et al (12) demonstrated that in postmenopausal women, the local concentration of estrogen in breast and endometrial carcinoma are of a similar level compared with those in premenopausal women. This local estrogen production has been demonstrated to be important for the progression of hormone-dependent cancer of the breast and endometrium (13–15).

In breast cancer cells, the local production of E2 from E1S via the sulfatase pathway has been revealed to exceed the production of E2 from androgenic precursors, including dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S) via the aromatase pathway (16). In the sulfatase pathway, subsequent to the cellular uptake of E1S, which is the most abundant type of estrogen in the circulation of postmenopausal women (17), estrone (E1) that has weak estrogenic activity is formed by the enzymatic activity of the steroid sulfatase (STS; Fig. 1). Subsequently, E2 is produced from E1 by the activity of 17β-oxoreductase. Conversely, E2 may be reverted back to E1 via the oxidative function of 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. As an inactivation pathway, E2 conjugation with sulfonate by estrogen sulfotransferase (SULT1E1) and phenol sulfotransferase (SULT1A1) produces estradiol sulfate (E2S), which exhibits minimal estrogenic activity. Conversely, STS may produce active estrogens from E2S and E1S, suggesting that an increase in the level of STS raises the levels of active estrogens and contributes to the progression of estrogen-sensitive types of cancer. Increased expression of STS has previously been identified to be associated with breast cancer progression (18). Similarly, in a small group of patients with advanced stage ovarian cancer an increased level of STS activity was revealed to be associated with a worse progression-free survival (PFS) (19). Additionally, STS mRNA was detectable in ovarian cancer cells, with similar levels detected in tissue from pre- and postmenopausal women (20), but was not detectable in normal ovarian surface epithelial cells (14).

Figure 1
Intratumoral synthesis of E2 and its inactivation by sulfate conjugation from circulating steroid hormone precursors in cancer cells. E2 is synthesized from E1S in the sulfatase pathway, and from DHEA-S in the aromatase pathway. E1S and DHEA-S are taken up from the circulation by transporters, such as those from the OATP family encoded by SCLO. In the sulfatase pathway, HSD-17β1 generates E2 from E1S, while E1 and E2 are inactivated by sulfonation by SULT1E1. Sulfonated estrogens do not bind to the ERα or ERβ. Aromatase generates E2 from androgenic precursors via the aromatase pathway. E2, 17β-estradiol; -S, sulfate; E1, estrone; STS, steroid sulfatase; SULT1E1, estrogen sulfotransferase; ER, estrogen receptor; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate; HSD-17β, 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; OATP, organic anion transporting polypeptides; SLCO, solute carrier for organic anions.
