Regulation of the TGF-β/Smad signaling pathway in glaucoma and the interaction with YAP/TAZ
TGF-β, which was first identified by Delarco and Todar in 1978, is a type of multifunctional cytokine (110–112). TGF-β has been found in almost all human cells, where it has a significant role in apoptosis, differentiation, the cell cycle, immunoregulation and the synthesis of the ECM via binding with its receptors (113). TGF-β has five subtypes, and three of these, TGF-β1, TGF-β2 and TGF-β3, are present in mammals, with homology of 70–80% (114). The signaling transduction of TGF-β acts by combining its ligand with receptors that are the membrane-associated proteins on the cell membrane. Receptor types I, II and III participate in TGF-β-mediated signaling transduction. However, receptor type III only has a supporting role during the incorporation of ligand and receptors I/II in the transduction, as it has no serine/threonine activity. TGF-β combines with the type II receptor, then the latter phosphorylates the type I receptor, which leads to the activation of this receptor (115). Later, activated type I receptor activates target protein, such as SMAD protein, resulting in the activation of the signaling transduction of TGF-β (115). The Smad family of proteins are key proteins in the process of TGF-β signal transduction, and has numerous subtypes (116) (Fig. 4). The PI3K signaling pathway can be regulated by TGF-β. Inhibiting PI3K can reduce the activity of Smad3 (receptor activation SMAD protein) (117). Pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase can specifically dephosphorylate SMAD in Drosophila, indicating that SMAD is the core protein that mediates the signal transduction of TGF-β (118). TGF-β has numerous biological effects and can be expressed in various types of cells, with an important role in regulating cell proliferation, cell differentiation, synthesis, deposition and degradation of the ECM (119). In addition, TGF-β mediates the individual development of growing, inflammatory process and the immune regulation (119).

Increasing aqueous outflow resistance is associated with the abnormal contraction and movement of the trabecular meshwork, as well the abnormal synthesis and secretion of the ECM. These abnormal activities cause the deposition of the ECM, and finally lead to a high IOP, and the damage of the structure and function of the eyes (4). A previous study proved that the human corneal endothelial layer, ciliary body, iris and trabecular meshwork can express and transcribe the RNA of TGF-β1 and TGF-β2 (120). Evidence has shown that the concentration of TGF-β in the aqueous humor of patients with POAG is markedly higher than that in patients without POAG (121). In HTM cells, the constitutive expression and release of biologically active TGF-β2 can be mediated by ϱ-GTPase signaling (122). ϱ-associated kinase inhibitors directly affect the TM and SC by controlling the synthesis of actin stress fibers, focal adhesion and cellular contraction (123,124). Trabecular meshwork cells synthesize and secrete the components of the ECM, including laminin, fiber adhesion proteins, hyaluronic acid and enzymes that can degrade the ECM (7). Research has revealed that Smad2/3, which can stimulate the cell to synthesize ECM, is the key protein in the process of ECM reconstruction (115). The increasing secretion of the ECM and the reduction of Smad2/3 will lead to the accumulation of ECM and stop the aqueous outflow from increasing. Studies have indicated that TGF-β can promote the synthesis of the ECM via regulation of trabecular meshwork cells, and then affect the aqueous human outflow resistance (7,120,125). Experiments in pig eyes have found that TGF-β2 can promote the synthesis of collagen protein and fiber connection protein. The synthesis of collagen protein and fiber connection protein inhibits the synthesis of hyaluronic acid and regulates the molecular structure of fiber connection protein. The proteolytic enzyme reduces the degradation of fiber link protein and then leads to the deposition of fiber connection protein, ultimately causing glaucoma (126) (Fig. 4). TGF-β can also promote the synthesis of metalloproteinase tissue inhibitors to inhibit matrix metalloproteinases and the degradation of the ECM, which causes the deposition of ECM in the trabecular meshwork (7,125). Overall, TGF-β promotes the deposition of the ECM by promoting the synthesis of the ECM, regulating trabecular cells and altering the structure of the ECM. Enhancing the levels of inhibitors of protease can reduce the degradation of the ECM.
It has been found that TGF-β can inhibit the proliferation of human trabecular cells stimulated by EGF (127). The reduction in the number of trabecular meshwork cells indicates that TGF-β can inhibit trabecular cell proliferation and then participate in the pathogenesis of glaucoma. TGF-β1 can enhance the expression of α-actin mRNA in human and monkey trabecular meshwork cells. TGF-β1 can promote the transfomation of the trabecular meshwork into fibroblasts, resulting in an increase in the contraction and motor function of the trabecular meshwork (128). Trabecular cell microfilament actin levels increased by TGF-β1 can promote the ability of cell shrinkage and movement, which is conducive to the outflow of the aqueous humor. If the abilities of shrinkage and movement are excessively enhanced, the trabecular meshwork shrinks and loses elasticity. Atrophy and inelasticity of the trabecular meshwork act against the outflow of the aqueous humor and may cause the IOP to increase, leading to glaucoma.

Activated TGF-β receptors phosphorylate SMAD2/3 on the C-terminal SSXS motif, and then the phosphorylated SMAD2/3 binds with SMAD4 to form a complex. TAZ can bind with the SMAD complex to promote the nuclear accumulation of SMAD (129). Lats can regulate the activity of the Hippo pathway and SMAD2/3 localization via YAP/TAZ. Studies of the regulation of TGF-β/SMAD signaling in cells indicate that the Hippo kinase cascade may regulate SMAD nuclear localization by YAP/TAZ phosphorylation (9) (Fig. 4).

Figure 4
Regulation of the TGF-β/Smad signaling pathway in glaucoma. TGF-β combines with the type II receptor, then phosphorylates the type I receptor, leading to the activation of this type I receptor. TGF-β2 promotes the synthesis of collagen protein and fiber connection protein, and inhibits the synthesis of hyaluronic acid. TGF-β2 promotes enzymes to inhibit the accumulation of the ECM. The TMC can secrete enzymes, promoting the accumulation of the ECM and increasing the aqueous outflow resistance. SMADA2/3 promotes the accumulation of the ECM in the HTM, leading to an increase in the aqueous outflow resistance and ocular hypertension, finally resulting in primary open-angle glaucoma. TGF-β, transforming growth factor-β; ECM, extracellular matrix; TAZ, transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif; TMC, trabecular meshwork cell.