STAT3 is a transcription factor activated by tyrosine phosphorylation
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) was first described in 1994 as a central transcription factor in acute inflammation [1]. Since then, STAT3 has been shown to regulate a wide spectrum of biological programs, including inflammation, tissue regeneration, cell proliferation, cell survival, cellular differentiation, angiogenesis, chemotaxis, and cell adhesion. This functional pleiotropy can be partially explained by the broad number of ligands that lead to STAT3 activation after binding to their respective cytokine receptors [2]. Upon cytokine binding, there is typically recruitment and reciprocal trans-phosphorylation of tyrosine kinases of the Janus kinase (JAK) family comprising JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, and tyrosine kinase 2 (TYK2) [3,4,5]. They, in turn, recruit and phosphorylate STAT3 (p-STAT3) at the highly conserved tyrosine residue 705 (pY705) [6], resulting in the formation of STAT3 homo- or heterodimers with signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) or signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) [7]. Subsequently, the activated signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) dimers translocate to the nucleus and facilitate gene transcription after binding to genomic DNA. Many pathways thus converge in STAT3-mediated gene-expression (Fig 1).

Figure 1
Regulatory circuits of the STAT3 signaling pathway.
STAT3 can be activated by a wide range of ligands binding to cytokine, growth factor, or G-protein-coupled receptors. With the exception of receptor tyrosine kinases, these receptors lack intrinsic kinase activity and thus act by recruiting adaptor kinases (e.g., JAKs, SRC) to propagate downstream signals. As a result, STAT3 is phosphorylated at tyrosine 705 (pY705, pink), forms homodimers or heterodimers, and translocates to the nucleus, where it transcribes regulators of various cellular processes. Additionally, STAT3 can be phosphorylated at serine 727 (pS727, purple) by serine/threonine kinases (e.g., MAPK, mTOR, PKCδ), which enhance STAT3 transcriptional activity in the nucleus or direct STAT3 to mitochondria. Acetylation at lysine 685 (K685, red) by histone acetyltransferases (e.g., CREB binding protein CBP/histone acetyltransferase p300) or methylation at lysine 140 (K140, blue) by histone methyltransferases (e.g., SET9) favor or impair STAT3 transcriptional activity, respectively. Unphosphorylated STAT3 exhibits regulatory functions in the nucleus or can be retained in the cytoplasm, where it associates with microtubules and focal adhesions. The activity of STAT3 is tightly regulated by phosphatases (e.g., PTPRD), SOCS3, PIAS3, and miRNAs that fine-tune the temporal pattern of STAT3 activity and its other pathway components. All miRNAs are degrading the mRNAs of the indicated proteins. A, acetylation; CBP, CREB-binding protein; CT-1R, cardiotrophin 1 receptor; CNTFR, ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor; DUSP2, dual specificity protein phosphatase 2; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; GHR, growth hormone receptor; G-CSFR, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor; GM-CSFR, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor; gp130, glycoprotein 130; IFNAR, interferon alpha receptor; IFNGR, interferon gamma receptor; IL, interleukin; JAK, Janus kinase; K140, lysine 140; K685, lysine 685; LIFR, leukemia inhibitory factor receptor; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; M, methylation; miRNA, microRNA; mTOR, mechanistic target of rapamycin; OSMR, oncostatin-M-specific receptor; P, phosphorylation; p300, histone acetyltransferase p300; PDGFR, platelet-derived growth factor receptor; PIAS3, protein inhibitor of activated STAT protein 3; PKCδ, protein kinase C delta type; pS727, phospho-serine 727; PTPRC, receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase C; PTPRD, receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase D; PTPRT, receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase T; pY705, phospho-tyrosine 705; SET9, histone-lysine N-methyltransferase SET9; SOCS3, suppressor of cytokine signaling 3; SRC, proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase; STAT3, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3; TpoR, thrombopoietin receptor; TRIM28, tripartite motif-containing protein 28.