Introduction
Dyneins are minus-end-directed microtubule motor proteins in eukaryotic cells, built around force-generating subunits termed ‘heavy chains’. Based on phylogenetic analysis, the last eukaryotic common ancestor possessed a rich inventory of at least nine classes of dynein heavy chain [1,2]. In some eukaryotic lineages, these dynein classes expanded and diversified. For example, there are 16 dynein heavy chain genes in the human genome and 25 in the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila [3,4]. The majority of these genes encode axonemal dyneins, which power the beating of motile cilia and flagella (terms which are used interchangeably in this review). Conversely, two dyneins function as motors that transport cargo: cytoplasmic dynein-1 and -2 (Figure 1). These two dynein transport machines play critical roles in mammalian cells and many other eukaryotes, with each motor fulfilling a distinct niche.

Dynein-1
Dynein-1 has varied modes of action in intracellular organization, mitosis, and cell migration. Among these, the transport of vesicles using coiled-coil cargo-adaptor proteins is perhaps the best understood. Here, dynein-1 assembles with its ubiquitous cofactor dynactin and a cargo adaptor, such as BicD2. The adaptor coiled coil lies in-between dynein-1 and dynactin, stabilizing their binding, while its distal end binds to a receptor specific to the cargo (Figure 1) [39]. Assembly of this complex activates dynein-1 motility [40,41]. Based on the predicted length of coiled coil within activating adaptors, dynein-1 may lie over 50 nm from the receptor on the cargo surface, although detailed images of dynein-1 in the act of cargo transport are lacking.

Dynein-2
Dynein-2 transport displays pronounced differences compared with dynein-1. First, rather than involving small groups of motors bound to cargo via dynactin, dynein-2 transport occurs in the context of long linear IFT trains [33,34], which can contain dozens of motors [52] (Figure 1). Second, instead of stochastic bouts of back-and-forth motion typical of dynein-1 transport, dynein-2 operates in a highly co-ordinated fashion with the anterograde IFT motor, kinesin-II [53]. Dynein-2 is carried as a passenger on anterograde IFT trains to the ciliary tip, and then, following IFT train remodeling, powers return transport to the ciliary base. Thus, dynein-2 has strongly preferred ‘turnaround zones’ at the ciliary tip and base, in which it interconverts between inactive and active states. Third, rather than involving conventional microtubule tracks, dynein-2 moves on microtubule doublets of the axoneme, with each doublet having an unusual structure consisting of one complete ‘A-tubule’ fused to an incomplete ‘B-tubule’ (Box 1), and each tubule bearing different MAPs and post-translational modifications [48,54]. Interestingly, it was recently discovered that in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, retrograde IFT occurs on the A-tubule and anterograde IFT occurs on the B-tubule, suggesting a means to prevent collisions between oppositely directed IFT trains [34]. Fourth, dynein-2 operates in the highly confined space between the doublet outer surface and the ciliary membrane [32]. Much of this space is occupied by the IFT train itself, which is closely appressed to the lipid bilayer [33]. Thus, dynein-2 is likely to experience the IFT train and underlying microtubule doublet with extremely high effective concentration. Moreover, dynein-2 probably experiences further confinement as it exports cargoes from the cilium through the ‘transition zone’; part of the diffusion barrier that separates the ciliary volume from the cytosol (Box 1).

Figure 1
Speculative impressions of cargo transport by dynein-1 and dynein-2.
Left: Depiction of dynein-1 transporting a vesicle. Two dynein-1 complexes (magenta) are templated by dynactin (dark purple) and a coiled-coil cargo adaptor (teal), whose distal end attaches to a receptor on the vesicle surface. For clarity, the densely packed milieu of molecules in the cytoplasm is not shown. Right: Depiction of dynein-2 (cyan) propeling a retrograde IFT train (blue) within the cilium. Dynein-2 operates in the confined space between the ciliary membrane (green) and the axoneme (orange), moving on the A-tubule of the microtubule doublet. Artwork in collaboration with Bara Krautz (www.scienceanimated.com; email: bara@scienceanimated.com).