Reactive Oxygen Species
As seen in Figure 2, mitochondrial superoxide anions reduce glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) activity, which in turn reduces cells' anti-oxidative capacity (Du et al., 2000). The exposure of mitochondria to ROS progressively induces mitochondrial dysfunction, which in turn promotes energy deficiency, axonal degeneration and DPN. Mitochondria are key regulators of cell survival and apoptosis. Damaged mitochondria trigger axon degeneration through caspase activation and cycles of fusion and fission (Green and Reed, 1998). The fission of mitochondria is partly regulated by dynamin related protein 1 (DRP1) (Twig et al., 2008). Increased DRP1 levels have been associated with mitochondria dysfunction, reduced ATP production, and axonal degeneration (Leinninger et al., 2006). DRP1 is notably upregulated in the axons of diabetic patients (Leinninger et al., 2006). Overall, an excess of ROS generation along with the inability of neurons to metabolize free radicals can promote the progressive loss of organelles and dysfunction in nuclear cell membranes (Figueroa-Romero et al., 2008).

ROS also reduce axon neurotrophic factor (IGF-1, IGF-II, NGF, and NT-3) production levels, thereby impairing neurons' ability to regenerate (Ishii, 1995; Tomlinson et al., 1997). High glucose levels stimulate the generation of pro-oxidant and highly reactive advanced glycation end products (AGE; section Advanced Glycation End Products) (Baynes and Thorpe, 1999). AGEs and ROS appear to be interdependent (Metz et al., 2003; Monnier, 2003), and central to the etiology of neurovascular dysfunction (Cameron et al., 2001). AGE generation is enhanced by oxygen and ROS; AGE formation can trigger ROS generation and oxidative damage (Monnier, 2003). Finally, hyperglycemia promotes the over-activation of polyol pathways (section Polyol Pathway), reducing cells' NADPH/NADP+ ratios and neurons' antioxidant capacities (Figueroa-Romero et al., 2008). Chronic hyperglycemia also enhances PKC activity, either through PLC-DAG pathways, or by reducing DAG-kinase activity (Xia et al., 1994) (King and Loeken, 2004). Enhanced PKC activity also increases mitochondrial NADPH oxidase activity (Inoguchi et al., 2000), further enhancing ROS levels (Balbi et al., 2018). A visual summary of ROS effects on neurons and glia can be found in Figures 2, ​,33.

ROS are normally metabolized by endogenous antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione peroxidase, and by certain vitamins such as A, C (ascorbic acid) and E (tocopherol) (Figueroa-Romero et al., 2008; Midaoui et al., 2015; Talbot et al., 2016a). Nutritional supplementation with antioxidants was shown to reduce DPN in rodents (Pop-Busui et al., 2006). While alpha-lipoic acid and superoxide dismutase improved symptoms and electroneurographic parameters among subjects with diabetic neuropathy (Bertolotto and Massone, 2012), clinical studies generally have shown mixed results in terms of antioxidant efficacy (Oyenihi et al., 2015). Overall, it is believed that increasing the bioavailability of antioxidant, as well as associated reductive stress, have limited impact on the patients' health outcome.

Figure 2
Chronic hyperglycemia impairs neuron function. Sensory neurons have a limited capacity to regulate their uptake of glucose. In the context of chronic hyperglycemia, such as in diabetes, high glucose concentrations drive mitochondria to produce ATP and transfer electrons. Excess glucose is also metabolized through the polyol pathway, leading to the production of advanced glycation end products. The electrons from the mitochondrial respiratory chain combine with intracellular oxygen and nitric oxide to produce ROS and RNS. Consequently, RNS, ROS, and AGE activate nuclear transcription factors, which enhance the expression of ion channel transducers (TRP and NaV channels) in addition to impairing neurons' capacity to self-repair. At the same time, microglia-released mediators (cytokines, ATP, BDNF, NO) stimulate GPCR and tyrosine kinase receptors, triggering downstream signaling cascades, which lead to the phosphorylation of TRP and NaV channels. A decrease in the activation threshold of these ion channel transducers can augment the influx of cations, which ultimately results in action potential firing and ectopic discharges. These effects enhance pain perception and signaling to the CNS. Chronic hyperglycemia also increases oxidative stress in the blood vessels that supply oxygen and nutrients to neuron terminals. This oxidative stress can cause microangiopathy, a phenomenon characterized by the loss of capillaries, which starves neuronal energy supplies. These phenomena are responsible for the loss of neuron terminals and pain insensitivity, as typically observed in later stage of DPN.