Classical IκB Proteins
In non-activated cells, NF-κB dimers are sequestered in the cytoplasm by an interaction with classical IκB proteins (IκBα, IκBβ, and IκBε), which mask the nuclear localization signal (NLS) of the NF-κB subunits and thus prevent their nuclear translocation (Figure 5a). Stimulation-dependent proteasomal degradation of the IκB proteins allows the translocation of the NF-κB dimers to the nucleus, where they modulate the expression of a variety of genes [2,3]. The best characterized classical IκB protein, IκBα, is composed of a signal response domain, ankyrin repeats, a PEST domain as well as a nuclear export signal (NES) and binds preferentially RelA/p50 heterodimers. The presence of an NES suggests that besides its function as a cytoplasmic inhibitor, IκBα is also involved in the termination of NF-κB transcriptional activity by promoting both the dissociation of RelA/p50 complexes from the DNA and their subsequent nuclear export [3,190,191,192].

In lymphoid malignancies, such as HL or DLBCL, characteristic genetic aberrations targeting the classical IκB proteins can trigger NF-κB activation downstream of the IKK complex [193,194]. The malignant cellular entity in HL, the Hodgkin-Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cell, is present at a low frequency (<1% of the tumor), while the bulk of the tumor is formed by activated inflammatory cells [195]. Aberrant NF-κB activation in these malignant cells is not only driven by the inflammatory tumor microenvironment or by latent infection with EBV, but also by somatic mutations of key NF-κB regulators, such as classical IκB proteins [10,196,197,198]. In HL, various genetic lesions have been described that result in the generation of truncated IκBα isoforms which lack part of the ankyrin repeats and are thus unable to sequester the NF-κB dimers in the cytoplasm (Figure 5b) [193,194,199,200]. Interestingly, inactivating mutations of IκBα have been detected preferentially in EBV-negative cases of HL (approximately 20% of cases; discussed in Section 5), suggesting that inactivation of IκBα is selected for as an alternative strategy to sustain NF-κB activation [194,197,201]. Besides HL, mutations negatively affecting the function of IκBα have been reported, albeit at lower frequency, in MALT lymphoma and in DLBCL, similarly providing an alternative mechanism for NF-κB activation in these tumor entities [202,203,204].

Analogous to inactivation of IκBα, loss-of-function mutations of IκBε, which result for instance in the expression of truncated versions lacking the ankyrin repeats essential for the interaction with NF-κB dimers, have been reported in HL, CLL, and PMBL as well as at a lower frequency in DLBCL and MCL (Figure 5b) [205,206,207,208]. Mechanistically, IκBε is assumed to limit the nuclear localization of Rel-containing dimers in a manner equivalent to IκBα [206,209,210]. While IκBα, however, predominantly regulates the cytoplasmic sequestration of RelA/p50 heterodimers, IκBε preferentially binds to c-Rel homodimers and c-Rel/p50 complexes [206,209]. Physiologically, stimulated B cells of IκBε-deficient mice exhibit increased proliferation and survival due to enhanced NF-κB activity [206,211]. Collectively, loss-of-function mutations targeting the classical IκB proteins IκBα and IκBε contribute to sustained NF-κB activation in lymphoid malignancies, indicating an important role of these negative regulators as tumor suppressors.

Figure 5
Inactivating mutations in classical IκB proteins promote canonical NF-κB activation. (a) The canonical NF-κB pathway is induced by the ligand-dependent activation of a variety of receptors, such as antigen receptors, the IL-1 receptor, Toll-like receptors and members of the TNF receptor family. Stimulus-dependent activation of the IKK complex results in the phosphorylation and subsequent proteasomal degradation of IκBα and IκBε. This allows the nuclear translocation of transcriptionally active RelA/p50 or c-Rel/p50 heterodimers; (b) Genetic alterations resulting in the expression of non-functional truncated versions of IκBα and IκBε, which lack part of the ankyrin repeat domain and are thus unable to bind to the NF-κB transcription factors, promote constitutive NF-κB activation in a subset of lymphoid malignancies. Proteins that are affected by recurrent genetic lesions in lymphoid malignancies are denoted with a red asterisk. IκB, inhibitor of κB; IKK, IκB kinase.