JAK-STAT signaling pathways
JAK-STAT is a relatively novel signaling pathway, which has been associated with multiple cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-1, −2 and −6, and hormones such as leptin, GH, placental lactogens, erythropoietin (EPO) and PRL (Fig. 3) (102–105). JAK-STAT participates in the regulation of key biological processes, including cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis (102). Furthermore, JAKs may serve as a fundamental switch that must be activated through a cytokine to trigger STAT proteins, which enables downstream target activation and subsequent regulation of target gene transcription (106). It has been reported that activated STAT proteins may also trigger suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS), protein repressors of activated STAT and transcription of cytokine-inducible SH2 domain-containing proteins (CISH; Fig. 3) (107,108). SOCS proteins are considered to be pivotal negative modulators of JAK-STAT signaling by terminating its upstream signals, of which four-SOC1, SOC2, SOC3 and CISH have been reported to serve as primary factors in the JAK-STAT pathway (106,109).

The progressive loss of pancreatic β-cells leads to D1M, which is closely associated with autoimmune assault (110). During the inflammatory progressive stage, overexpression of JAK-STAT molecules in pancreatic islets has been reported to contribute to β-cell dysfunction (111). A recent study documented that BRD0476, a novel inhibitor of β-cell apoptosis, impeded inteferon-γ-induced JAK2 and STAT1 signaling to facilitate β-cell survival (112). Unlike general JAK-STAT pathway suppressors, BRD0476 blocked JAK-STAT signaling pathways via ubiquitin-specific peptidase 9X (USP9X) without inhibiting the kinase function of any JAK (112). With regard to PRL, it has been observed that human β-cells failed to expand in response to PRL, potentially due to a deficiency of PRL receptors, among other explanations (5). Notably, a failure of β-cell expansion could be overcome by overexpression of murine STAT5a, due to the resulting upregulation and nuclear translocation of cdk4 and cyclins D1-3 (Fig. 3). This STAT5 signaling has been linked with β-cell cycle activity (113). Furthermore, EPO, acting via the EPO receptor, has been reported to stimulate β-cell proliferation through JAK2-STAT5 (Fig. 3) (114). De Groef et al (115) demonstrated that PDL stimulated the expression of multiple cytokines that served as positive ligands of STAT3 signaling in β-cells. In addition, β-cell cycling was enhanced by activating STAT3 with IL-6 (Fig. 3). STAT3 played an important role in maintaining the stability of β-cells by regulating the cell cycle and protecting against DNA damage (115).

Figure 3
JAK-STAT signaling in tandem with multiple cytokines and hormones participates in the regulation of β-cells. Circles of the same color represent signals within the same pathway. Red and black lines indicate inhibition and promotion, respectively. JAK-STAT, janus kinase-signal transducers and activators of transcription; EPO, erythropoietin; GH, growth hormone; PRL, prolactin; FOXM1, forkhead box protein M1; cdk, cyclin-dependent kinase; SOCS, suppressor of cytokine signaling; CISH, cytokine-inducible SH2 domain-containing proteins; IFN-γ, interferon-γ; IFN-γR, interferon-γ receptor; IL-6, interleukin 6; IL-6R, interleukin 6 receptor; PKB, protein kinase B; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; mTORC1, mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1; Ras, rat sarcomas; P, phosphorylated.