Conclusions
δ-Secretase is a novel protease that plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. It cleaves its substrates such as tau, APP, SET, α-synuclein, SRPK2, and TDP-43, promoting the aggregation of Aβ, tau and α-synuclein, inducing neuronal cell death. δ-Secretase is tightly regulated at the transcriptional and posttranslational levels. C/EBPβ, an inflammatory cytokine-activated transcription factor, is the major transcriptional factor that regulates δ-secretase expression. Notably, the expression of C/EBPβ is regulated by the BDNF/TrkB signaling pathway. On the other hand, BDNF/TrkB also activates AKT, which phosphorylates δ-secretase at T322 and inhibits its enzymatic activity. The δ-secretase-cleaved tau (1–368) fragment in turn blocks the BDNF/TrkB signaling pathway. δ-Secretase is also phosphorylated by SRPK2 at S226, which promotes its protease activity (Fig. 1). Other posttranslational modifications, such as glycosylation and ubiquitination, also affect δ-secretase activity. Abundant evidence supports that δ-secretase may play a role in neurodegenerative disease. However, clinical evidence that can establish a definitive causal link between δ-secretase and neurodegenerative diseases is still lacking. It is believed that δ-secretase-modulated molecular targets may serve as diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets for AD. A series of Michael acceptor inhibitors, as well as small molecule inhibitors of legumain have been developed. The small molecule inhibitor compound 11 alleviates AD pathology in two mouse AD models. Because δ-secretase simultaneously cleaves both APP and Tau, it provides an unprecedent innovative target for treating this devastating neurodegenerative disease. Conceivably, further understanding of the biological and pathological mechanisms of δ-secretase will provide more novel diagnostic and therapeutic targets for neurodegenerative diseases.

Figure 1
The regulation of δ-secretase in neurodegenerative diseases. The expression of δ-secretase is regulated by the transcriptional factor C/EBPβ, which is regulated by the BDNF/TrkB signalling pathway. δ-secretase is phosphorylated by Akt which inhibits its activity, and SRPK2 which enhances its activity. δ-secretase also cleaves α-synuclein, generating α-synuclein (1–103) fragment and promotes the onset of PD. Furthermore, α-synuclein (1–103) fragment activates MAO-B, which catalyses the oxidative deamination of dopamine and generation of DOPEL. DOPEL further activates δ-secretase. δ-secretase also cleaves TDP-43, which is indicated in FTD/ALS. δ-secretase cleaves APP, promoting the generation of Aβ. δ-secretase also cleaves tau, generating an aggregation-prone fragment. δ-secretase-derived tau fragment enhances BACE1 activity, which further facilitate Aβ production. δ-secretase-derived SET fragments inhibit the dephosphorylation of tau, while δ-secretase-derived SRPK2 fragment affects the alternative splicing of tau. All these pathways promote tau aggregation and the onset of AD