YAP1/TAZ Enhance the Transcription of Pro-Oncogenic Genes
CTGF (or CCN2) is a member of the CCN protein family, which includes six members of secretory extracellular matrix-associated matricellular proteins. CTGF is a cysteine-rich protein that regulates cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions and exerts multicellular functions including the regulation of cell proliferation, adhesion, migration, fibrosis, and inflammation. Notably, CTGF expression has been shown to be associated with abundant extracellular matrix formation in MM tissues [70]. Furthermore, CTGF expression was found to be significantly enhanced in MM cells in response to Hippo signaling inactivation, TGF-β stimulation [70], and/or β-catenin-TCF-LEF signaling [72] (Figure 2). CTGF has also been suggested to be highly expressed in sarcomatoid-type MMs and has been shown to mediate the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in MM [72]. Similarly, another CCN family member, CYR61 (or CCN1), is also a well-known YAP1 target; however, its role in MM development and progression has not yet been determined.

The Hippo pathway is also regulated by G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling [73] (Figure 2). Phospholipase-C, the downstream effector of Gαq signaling, is required to enable inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate and diacylglycerol to be formed from phosphatidylinositol 4,5-biphosphate, and thus also for signal transduction. PLCB4 (which encodes phospholipase-C β4) was shown to be a YAP1-target gene [71], as inducing PLCB4 knockdown attenuated the growth of YAP1-transduced immortalized mesothelial cells, and YAP1-active (but not YAP1-non-active) MM cells [71].

Figure 2
Signaling cascades and molecules that affect Hippo pathway signaling and YAP1/TAZ activation in MM cells. In addition to cell-to-cell adhesion status and RTK signaling, the Hippo pathway is also regulated by multiple signals including from the GPCR pathway, mevalonate pathway, and energy stress. Upon the activation of other intracellular signaling such as through TGF-β and Wnt signaling pathways, the transcription of YAP1/TAZ-target genes is further enhanced, which induces more aggressive malignant phenotypes of MM cells including cell proliferation, invasion, and EMT.