NF2 and the Hippo Pathway
The neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) gene encodes the tumor suppressor protein moesin-ezrin-radixin-like protein (merlin), which is a member of the Band 4.1 family of cytoskeletal linker proteins [35] (Figure 1). One of the important downstream signaling cascades that are regulated by merlin is the Hippo pathway, which is involved in critical biological processes including organ-size control, development, differentiation, tissue regeneration (via cell-growth restriction), cell division regulation, apoptosis, and cancer development [36,37]. The four core components in this pathway comprise MST1 and MST2 kinases, SAV1 (also termed WW45), MOB1, and LATS1 and LATS2 kinases, all of which have been shown to act as tumor suppressors (Figure 1). Upon receiving upstream signaling, MST1/2 kinases (in a complex formed with the SAV1 scaffold protein) phosphorylate and activate LATS1/2. The latter is activated by the MOB1 scaffold protein to then phosphorylate and inactivate the YAP1 and TAZ transcriptional coactivators. The phosphorylated YAP1/TAZ are then directed to either be retained within the cytoplasm (via an interaction with 14-3-3) or degraded (via poly-ubiquitination). Conversely, when the Hippo pathway is not active, underphosphorylated YAP1/TAZ enter the nucleus and act as transcriptional coactivators. YAP1/TAZ interact with several distinct transcription factors including TEA domain (TEAD) transcription factors, SMADs, p73, Runt related transcription factor (RUNX), T-Box 5 (TBX5), the carboxyl-terminal fragment of Erb-B2 receptor tyrosine kinase 4 (ERBB4), and early growth response-1 (EGR1) [38].

YAP1/TAZ Enhance the Transcription of Pro-Oncogenic Genes
Activation of the YAP1 transcriptional coactivator has been shown to induce the transcription of multiple cancer-promoting genes in MM cells (Figure 1), including cell cycle promoting genes such as cyclin D1 (CCND1) and forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) [69], connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) [70], and phospholipase-C beta 4 (PLCB4) [71].

Figure 1
Schematic representation showing NF2/merlin-Hippo signaling cascade dysregulation in malignant mesothelioma (MM) cells. Signals from the extracellular environment, transduced via cell-cell contact (cadherin), cell-matrix contact (CD44 and integrin), and/or growth factor receptors (receptor tyrosine kinases, RTKs), affect merlin tumor-suppressive activity. Activated (underphosphorylated) merlin regulates the Hippo signaling cascade and suppresses the activity of the YAP1/TAZ transcriptional coactivators. As MMs show frequent alteration of merlin (the NF2 gene product) and Hippo pathway components including LATS1/2, the resultant underphosphorylated (activated) YAP1/TAZ transcriptional coactivators enhance the expression of many pro-oncogenic genes including CCDN1, FOXM1, CTGF, and PLCB4 in MM cells. P: phosphorylation, Ub: ubiquitination.