Clinical Evidence for Immune Cell-Intrinsic Hippo Signaling
Some compelling evidence for the role of Hippo signaling in the immune system comes from clinical case reports of patients who have disrupted MST1 expression/function. Inherited mutations in the gene that encodes MST1 (STK4) have been described and are associated with immune phenotypes. Specifically, MST1 loss causes combined immunodeficiency with increased susceptibility to bacterial/viral/fungal infections as well as autoimmune signs/symptoms (e.g., hypergammaglobulinemia and autoantibody production) [67,68,69,70,71]. Hypermethylation of the MST1/STK4 promoter and reduced MST1 expression has also been noted in patients with autoimmune pancreatitis (with extrapancreatic lesions) and rheumatoid arthritis [72]. Interestingly, studies examining the molecular mechanisms underlying these associations have demonstrated that MST1 loss within leukocytes is primarily responsible for the clinical presentation. Indeed, patients with MST1 dysfunction are lymphocytopenic and show profound deficits in T cell maturation, trafficking, responsiveness and viability [67,68,69,71]. Abnormalities in neutrophil viability have also been reported [69]. These pathologies are accurately recapitulated in Mst1/Stk4-knockout mouse models [73,74,75,76]. Mst1/Stk4-knockout mouse models have also been used to implicate MST1 in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and collagen-induced arthritis [75]. Therefore, it is clear that MST1 plays vital roles in normal immune cell function, immune homeostasis and immune-related disease (Figure 4) [77,78].

Figure 4
Overview of leukocyte-intrinsic Hippo pathway functions. Hippo pathway components are involved in regulating leukocyte activity, namely T lymphocytes. MST1 is also involved in both canonical and non-canonical signaling involved in T lymphocyte proliferation and survival. (1) MST1 plays a crucial role in regulating the cytoarchitecture of T lymphocytes to facilitate polarization, formation of the leading edge, adhesion and migration. This function is thought to be dependent upon the regulation of the integrin leukocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1). Direct and indirect interactions between MST1 and other proteins, including endosomal adaptor protein Rab13, cytoskeletal regulatory protein Kindlin-3, a number of RhoA GTPases (RAP-RAPL complex, Rac1), L-plastin (LPL) and myosin IIa all lead to proper LFA-1 activation, spatiotemporal distribution and appropriate low/high affinity partitioning on T lymphocyte membrane. These interactions allow for T lymphocyte migration, survival and adhesion, as well as enable correct thymic egress and secondary lymphoid organ infiltration. (2) MST1/2 signaling is also involved in CD4+ T lymphocyte Th17 differentiation, through interactions with FOXO1/3 and upregulation of FoxP3 transcriptional activity. (3) Hippo signaling is also involved in regulating clonal expansion of CD8+ T lymphocytes vs. terminal differentiation, through transcriptional regulation of Blimp1. (4) Hippo signaling through LATS1 or MST/FOXO interactions is implicated in apoptotic control, homeostatic maintenance of T lymphocytes and control of oxidative stress. Solid lines represent direct interactions. Dotted lines represent mechanisms that are indirect or that have not been fully delineated.