Hypoxic and Angiogenic Factors
The proliferative zone of the growth plate is an avascular hypoxic mesenchymal tissue (Maes et al., 2012). Intriguingly, chondrocytes are competent at surviving and differentiating in this challenging environment. It has been suggested that this survival and capability of differentiation is, at least in part, by virtue of the actions of hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs), such as HIF1-α (Maes et al., 2012). Furthermore, the process of endochondral ossification in the growth plate is driven by vascularization and hypertrophic chondrocytes in the growth plate that secrete angiogenic stimuli which actively support vascularization (Maes et al., 2012). This hypertrophy associated angiogenic switch is a major driver of active growth plate cartilage remodeling toward bony tissue (Maes et al., 2012). The analogy between endochondral ossification processes and molecular processes observed in OA also led to the theory that OA pathophysiology may involve hypoxic/angiogenic mediators, such as HIFs and VEGF. An overview of the newly acquired insights into this pathway and its involvement in development of OA chondrocyte hypertrophy is provided in Table ​Table1f1f and Figure 5.

FGF Signaling
Fibroblast growth factors comprise a group of morphogens involved in wound healing, angiogenesis, and are involved in processes such as proliferation and differentiation in different cell types (Turner and Grose, 2010). They also have been described as being involved in endochondral ossification, since FGF23 and FGF receptor 1 are produced by growth plate hypertrophic chondrocytes (Raimann et al., 2013). Given that OA chondrocytes also produce FGF family members (Orfanidou et al., 2009), studies have investigated the involvement of FGF signaling in the chondrocyte phenotypic alterations observed in OA cartilage. An overview of newly acquired insights into this pathway and its involvement in development of OA chondrocyte hypertrophy is provided in Table ​Table1g1g and Figure ​Figure55.



Figure 5
Overview of the processes of hypoxia and angiogenesis and the canonical fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling pathway and newly acquired insights into their relation to the development of the osteoarthritic (OA) chondrocyte hypertrophic phenotype. The processes and canonical FGF signaling pathway was updated with recent insights in the role of the processes of hypoxia and angiogenesis and the FGF signaling pathway in the hypertrohic switch occuring during OA development. In green pro-chondrogenic relations are shown, while pro-hypertrophic relations are depicted in red.