
Ion channels and dysfunctional pathways in ASD
Rheb is a direct activator of mTOR complex by activating its regulatory associated protein (raptor; Ma & Blenis, 2009). Once the mTOR complex is activated, it phosphorylates a series of protein such as the S6 kinase 1 (S6K1), the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E‐binding protein 1 (eIF‐4BP1), and the carbamoyl‐phosphate synthetase 2, aspartate transcarbamylase, and dihydroorotase (CAD). S6K1 and eIF‐4BP1 are essential for protein synthesis and polypeptide translation in ribosomes and cell proliferation, while CAD is a key player in pyrimidine synthesis and so nucleotide synthesis (Ma & Blenis, 2009). In addition, the tuberous sclerosis complex can also be activated by AMPK, GSK3β, and p53 which leads the inhibition of mTOR pathway. Furthermore, variations in TSC1 and TSC2 genes have been associated with ASD (Devlin & Scherer, 2012). Also, variations in mTOR pathway repressors, such as for the neurofibromin 1 (NF1) gene NF1, cause neurofibromatosis type 1 syndrome as reported in 1% patients with ASD (Devlin & Scherer, 2012). The phosphatase and tension protein homolog (PTEN) is also known to downregulate mTOR pathway via both PI3K and AKT. Patients with ASD associated with cerebral malformation, like macrocephaly, have been found to carry variations in the PTEN gene in 7% of the cases (Devlin & Scherer, 2012; McBride et al., 2010; Figure 1).

Besides protein synthesis and translation that have been shown to be implicated in the process of ASD, the mechanism of protein degradation was also studied in ASD. Genetic studies indicate that ubiquitin–proteasome system is necessary for normal human cognitive function by regulating the synapse assembly and elimination (Mabb & Ehlers, 2010). The ubiquitin ligase enzyme Ube3A is a member of the E3 ubiquitin ligase family. The disruption of its activity leads to Angelman syndrome, while in turn the Angelman syndrome was described in ASD with CNVs and mutations in UBE3A gene (Greer et al., 2010). In Ube3A knockout mice, electrophysiological studies demonstrated an impaired long‐term potentiation (LTP) in the hippocampus, which suggest that alteration of Ube3A results in the loss of neuronal plasticity. In fact, Ube3A increases transcription through the myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) complex and regulates synapse function by ubiquitinating and degrading the synaptic protein Arc (activity‐regulated cytoskeleton‐associated protein). The role of Arc is to decrease long‐term potentiation by promoting the internalization of AMPA receptors, which are the mediators of the excitatory neurotransmission in the central nervous system (Greer et al., 2010). On another hand, a decrease in AMPAR expression at synapses has been observed in patients with fragile X syndrome. This decrease is due to excessive mGluR5 signaling resulting in an increased Arc translation and consequently excessive AMPA receptors internalization (Dolen & Bear, 2008). In FMR1 knockout mice, injections of mGluR5 restore the AMPA receptors expression levels and prevent fragile X syndrome (Dolen et al., 2007).

Interestingly, it has been shown that an alteration of the inhibitory phosphorylation function of the Ca2+/calmodulin‐dependent protein kinase II (CamKII) is coupled to an increase in AMPA receptors expressed at the synapse (Rose, Jin, & Craig, 2009). In addition, mutations affecting this critical site of CamKII were shown to prevent the behavioral deficit in UBE3A gene‐altered mice, suggesting that the Angelman syndrome is associated with a perturbation of CamKII functions (van Woerden et al., 2007; Figure 1).

Figure 1
Synaptic signaling pathways associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Alterations in the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex (mTOR) are considered risk factors for ASD. mTOR is activated by Rheb‐GTP. Upstream of Rheb is the tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC1–TSC2). TSC2 contains a GTPase‐activating protein (GAP) domain that converts Rheb from GTP‐bound form to its inactive GDP‐bound form. Several upstream signaling pathways ranging from PI3K–AKT, Ras–ERK, LKB1–AMPK and Wnt–GSK3β pathways, positively or negatively regulate mTOR signaling. (AMPK, AMP‐activated protein kinase; ERK, extracellular signal‐regulated kinase; GSK3β, glycogen synthase kinase 3β; and PI3K, phosphoinositide 3‐kinase). The mTOR pathway is also regulated by the brain‐derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) which binds to the tropomyosin‐related kinase B (TRKB). BDNF plays a key role in the development and the plasticity of the central nervous system and it is considered a risk factor for ASD because increased levels of BDNF concentration have been observed in the serum and brain of patients with ASD. PI3K is also regulated by the synaptic protein SHANK, which is associated with metabotropic glutamate receptors type 1 (mGluR1) via the neuronal scaffolding protein HOMER1. The mTOR complex is a key modulator of protein synthesis by direct phosphorylation of 4E‐binding proteins (4E‐BPs) and activation of the ribosomal subunit S6 kinase (S6Ks), which in turn phosphorylate translation initiation factors. Thus, mTOR blocks the activation of cell autophagy and promotes cell proliferation, growth, and differentiation. The activity of the proteasome is also regulated by neuronal activity. The expression of UBE3A is increased through the transcription factor MEF2 and regulates the degradation of ARC protein, which promotes the internalization of AMPA‐R and regulates excitatory synapse development. Variations in the neuronal L‐type Ca2+ channel α subunit CACNA1C have been associated with Timothy syndrome and with ASD. In addition, Ca2+/calmodulin‐dependent protein kinases are associated with components of the neuronal complex including the fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) and its protein interaction CYFIP1, which also consider candidate genes in ASD. UBE3A: ubiquitin–protein ligase E3A; MEF2: myocyte‐specific enhancer factor 2; ARC: activity‐regulated cytoskeleton‐associated protein; AMPR: AMPA receptors; CYFIP1: cytoplasmic FMRP‐interacting protein 1