Roles of p75NTR in Neural Crest Cell Migration During Development
To understand the potential roles of p75NTR in NCC migration, we have to examine further and analyze multiple molecular factors that control NCC migration (Figure ​Figure22). During the development, NCCs proceed to an EMT, which includes the loss of tight and adherent junctions, modifications of the apical-basal cell polarity and rearrangements of the cytoskeleton, which will help cells to start migrating (Pegoraro and Monsoro-Burq, 2013). During EMT, the transcription factor Twist-1 is activated by a variety of signal transduction pathways, including AKT signal transducers (Figures ​Figures3A,3A, ​,4A4A). Activated Twist-1 upregulates N-cadherin and downregulates E-cadherin (also known as cadherin-2 and 1, respectively), which are the hallmarks of EMT (Vincentz et al., 2008). Likewise, it has been demonstrated that NCCs are trapped into the neural tube in Twist-1 knockout mice (Vincentz et al., 2008). Twist-1 is also known to induce expression of cell migration markers including periostin, cadherin-11, and MMP2/MMP9 (Shelton and Yutzey, 2008); however, it is unclear if it is through a direct or indirect induction (Kim et al., 2014).

Cadherin-11 has been described as an emerging contributor to embryonic development, tissue morphogenesis, as well as tumor invasion and metastasis (Kim et al., 2014). The ectodomain of cadherin-11 leads to homophilic ligation and adhesive recognition, whereas protein interaction with the highly conserved cytoplasmic tails leads to actin cytoskeleton remodeling and cell signaling pathways (Yap and Kovacs, 2003). Cadherin-based cell adhesion activates phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and AKT (Kim et al., 2014, Figure ​Figure3A3A). Likewise, it has been shown that cadherin-11 interacts with ErbB2 receptor to activate AKT pathway and NCC migration (Mathavan et al., 2017).

Par3 has been described as a driver for the maturation of the cell adhesion complex and has been linked to the regulation of microtubule dynamics and Rac1 activity through interaction with the Rac-GEF Tiam-1 (Moore et al., 2013, Figure ​Figure3A3A). Likewise, it has been shown that Par3 controls CIL by inhibiting the Rac-GEF Trio to prevent Trio-mediated activation of Rac1 at cell–cell contacts (Moore et al., 2013, Figure ​Figure3A3A). Nonetheless, Moore and collaborators suggested that cadherin 11 act as a regulator of Par3 functions at the cell contact as it has been shown that during NCC migration, the Rac-GEF Trio interact with cadherin 11, which is localized to cell protrusions as well as cell-cell contacts (Moore et al., 2013, Figure ​Figure3A3A). The link between Par3 and p75NTR has not been established during NCC migration; however, it has been demonstrated that in Schwann cell myelination, BDNF activates Par3 through p75NTR interaction in order to induce Rac1 (Tep et al., 2012, Figure ​Figure3A3A).

Besides Par3, the switch from E to N-cadherin, as well as from ephrin A to ephrin B are essential for CIL between NCCs (Roycroft and Mayor, 2016). Again cadherin-11 is implicated in CIL since Becker et al. (2013) demonstrated that cadherin-11 mediated cell–cell adhesion was necessary in CIL for directional and collective NCC migration through Rac1 and small Rho-GTPase RhoA signaling. Indeed, Rho-GTPases play active roles in remodeling the actin cytoskeleton and in the regulation of microtubules (Roycroft and Mayor, 2016). Interestingly, it has been demonstrated that the DD of p75NTR is able to interact with Rho-GDI for the activation of RhoA pathway (Lin et al., 2015, Figure ​Figure3A3A).

Ephrins are membrane-bound proteins that mediate bidirectional signals between adjacent cells (Baker and Antin, 2003). Ephrins are known to direct cell movements during multiple morphogenetic processes, including NCC migration, through cytoskeleton remodeling processes (Baker and Antin, 2003). Ephrin receptors and ephrin ligands are subdivided into two subclasses with distinct binding specificities that correlate with structural similarities: Ephrin-A ligands (named ephrin-A1 to ephrin-A5) are anchored in the plasma membrane through a GPI-linkage, and each of them can bind any of the ephrin-A subclass of receptors (ephrin-A1 to ephrin-A8) (O’Leary and Wilkinson, 1999). On the other hand, ephrin-B ligands (ephrin-B1 to ephrin-B3) have a transmembrane domain and a cytoplasmic region and are able to interact with members of the ephrin-B subclass of receptors (ephrin-B1–ephrin-B6) as well as to the ephrin-A4 receptor (O’Leary and Wilkinson, 1999).

As reviewed by Theveneau and Mayor (2012), migratory NCCs and their surrounding tissues express a wide variety of ephrins. Indeed, ephrin signaling takes place in three different situations:

(1) NCCs belonging to different streams express different genetic repertoires, preventing them from mixing and keeping the streams separated (Theveneau and Mayor, 2012).

(2) NCCs are prevented from invading areas where non-NCCs express complementary ephrins (Theveneau and Mayor, 2012).

(3) NCCs and their invaded tissues may display matching receptor and ligand codes to allow homing (Theveneau and Mayor, 2012).

Ephrin-A4 and ephrin-A5 have been described as downregulated during early NCC migration, whereas ephrin-B1 was upregulated (Morrison et al., 2017). Ephrin-B1 has been reported to interact with the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), in a phosphorylation-dependent manner that leads to enhanced activation of STAT3 transcriptional activity (Bong et al., 2007, Figure ​Figure3A3A). Moreover, it was demonstrated that STAT3 activity, in this context, depended on the tyrosine kinase Jak2, and two tyrosines within the ICD of ephrin-B1 that were critical for its association with STAT3 and its activation (Bong et al., 2007).

A closer look to ephrin receptors and ligands indicated that their interactions occur between adjacent cells mediating juxtacrine signaling (Atapattu et al., 2014). Ephrin receptor and ligand interactions involve clusters of receptors and ligands leading to large receptor–ligand complexes, also including cadherins (Atapattu et al., 2014). Ephrin activation requires proteolytic cleavage that is processed by a variety of proteases including a disintegrin and metalloproteases (ADAMs) (Atapattu et al., 2014, Figures ​Figures3A,3A, ​,4A4A). ADAM13 has been reported to specifically cleave ephrin-B ligands as well as other proteins including cadherin-11 and is linked to NCC migration during the development (Gaultier et al., 2002). In this context, it appears that ADAM13 is able to upregulate canonical Wnt signaling and early expression of the transcription factor snail2, whereas ephrin-B inhibits this pathway, suggesting a role of ephrin-B cleavage by ADAM13 in the repression of canonical Wnt signaling (Wei et al., 2010).

Similar to ADAM proteases, matrix metalloproteases (MMP) have been reported to cleave ephrin ligands and receptors. MMPs are classically described for their ability to degrade extracellular matrix components to facilitate cell migration; however, they also participate in the proteolysis of several growth factors and receptors like FGFR or ErbB receptors (Peschon et al., 1998). Looking at cell migration and invasion, it has been reported that ephrin-B2 receptor which is activated upon ephrin-B1 ligand interaction and MMP8 cleavage, activate Arf1 and RhoA allowing their interacting with Disheveled and leading to cell repulsion and invasion (Lin et al., 2008, Figure ​Figure3A3A). Likewise, MMP2/MMP9 have been described as activating ephrin-B4 receptor/ephrin-B2 ligand and mediate migration of endothelial cells via PI3Kinase/AKT pathway (Steinle et al., 2002). As mentioned above, Twist-1 is a regulator of MMP2/MMP9 expression leading to early NCC migration, during the development (Figure ​Figure3A3A).

Regarding p75NTR interactions with ephrins, it has been shown that the BDNF induced ephrin-A5 ligand/eprhin-B2 receptor/p75NTR interactions leading to cytoskeleton remodeling (Marler et al., 2010, Figure ​Figure3A3A). Another interesting link between p75NTR and ephrin receptors and/or ligands has been established several years ago as kinase D-interacting substrate of 220 kDa/ankyrin repeat-rich membrane spanning (Kidins220/ARMS), a scaffold protein complex, has been described as interacting with p75NTR as well as other receptors, including ephrin receptors (Neubrand et al., 2012). Most importantly, it was shown that Kidins220/ARMS was activated by phosphorylation after treatment with NGF (Figure ​Figure4A4A), BDNF (Figure ​Figure3A3A), and ephrin-B2, suggesting a critical link between cell surface receptors and intracellular signaling events for both the NT and the ephrin families (Kong et al., 2001). However, the link between NT, p75NTR, and ephrin in migrating NCCs has not been described so far.

Altogether, it appears that during NCC invasion and migration, p75NTR may play several roles in EMT and CIL events through several pathways including AKT, Rho-GTPase RhoA, and Jak2/STAT3. These signaling pathways seem to be mainly activated through interactions with ephrin and cadherin family members as summarized in Figures ​Figures3A,3A, ​,4A4A, and could modulate NT effects through p75NTR and potentially coreceptors as well as through scaffold proteins. However, even if ephrin, cadherin, along with p75NTR, BDNF, and NGF have been implicated in NCC migration and invasion during the development, it is still unclear which coreceptors and/or effectors are involved in such processes. To better understand and “fill the gaps,” we will now analyze our actual knowledge about p75NTR roles in cancer cell migration and invasion.

Roles of p75NTR in Cancer Cell Migration and Invasion
Cancer stem cells (CSCs), also known as tumor-initiating cells, represent a minority population of tumor cells that share the biological characteristics of normal stem cells such as self-renewal and differentiation (Suraneni and Badeaux, 2013). Moreover, CSCs are described as resistant to conventional therapies and are thought to be responsible for recurrence as a driving force for tumor initiation, recurrences, or metastasis. Their identification is functional or operational as they are the only tumor cells able to start a tumor in a xenograft procedure and they are able to grow as spheres when cultivated. Indeed, at least so far, there is no specific marker to identify CSCs.

As mentioned above, during the development, NCCs proceed to an EMT that includes Twist-1 activation leading to the switch from E to N-cadherin (Pegoraro and Monsoro-Burq, 2013). These changes are highly similar to those observed in metastatic tumor cells undergoing EMT (Pegoraro and Monsoro-Burq, 2013), as well as in circulating tumoral cells (CTCs) (Lombard et al., 2015). In several cancers, Twist-1 has been identified as a master regulator of EMT (Firulli and Conway, 2008) and is characterized by a downregulation of E-cadherin and an upregulation of N-cadherin on cell surfaces (Cho et al., 2016). Twist-1 plays an important role in some physiological processes involved in metastasis. In addition, Twist-1 has been described as being responsible for the maintenance of CSCs, the development of chemotherapy resistance (Khan et al., 2013), and in some instances, the radiotherapy resistance (Xiong et al., 2017). In this context, STAT3 signaling pathway seems to be the most common pathway that targets genes like MMP-2, MMP-9, VEGF, and Twist1, which are involved in cell migration and invasion (Cao et al., 2016, Figure ​Figure3B3B).

Another remarkable common point with NCC migration and invasion during development is the fact that cadherin-11 has also been reported to be overexpressed in several cancers and linked to cell migration and invasion (Figures ​Figures3B,3B, ​,4B4B). Indeed, Birtolo et al. (2017) demonstrated that the knockdown of cadherin-11, in cancer cells, reduced pancreatic cancer cell migration. Likewise, Satcher et al. (2015) showed that clatherin-mediated internalization of cadherin-11 regulated the surface trafficking of cadherin-11 and that the dynamic turnover of cadherin-11 regulated the migratory function of cadherin-11, in prostate cancer cells. It was also suggested that p75NTR could impact U87 glioblastoma cell migration through modulation of specific genes, including cadherin-11 (Berghoff et al., 2015). Finally, Li et al.’s (2011) study revealed a novel cadherin-11-Trio-Rac signaling axis that contributes significantly to breast cancer cell migration (Figure ​Figure3B3B). As mentioned above, during NCC migration, cadherin-11 modulate the Par3 function that has been linked to the regulation of microtubule dynamics by inhibiting the Rac-GEF-Trio to prevent Trio-mediated activation of Rac1. Likewise, the BDNF has been shown to activate Par3 through its interaction with p75NTR. In cancer, studies that performed genome-wide screening for microdeletions revealed that the region containing the Par3 gene was deleted in lung, head and neck, and esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cell lines (Nakamura et al., 2016). In those cancers, Par3 seems to act as a tumor suppressor. Likewise, Par3 has been described as a metastasis inhibitor in pancreatic and breast cancer; however, it has also been shown that in those two cases that Par3 presents an alternative splicing, which could change its interaction capacities with target factors including Rac1 (Ke et al., 2018). On the other hand, in clear cell renal carcinoma, Par3 overexpression was associated with poor prognosis (Nakamura et al., 2016). Likewise, in skin cancer, Par3 acts as a tumor suppressor or a tumor promoter depending on the tumor type; in keratoacanthoma it acts as a tumor suppressor, whereas it acts as a tumor promotor for melanoma (Nakamura et al., 2016). Interestingly, abnormal NT signaling has been implicated in the progression of numerous cancers, including neuroblastoma, medulloblastoma, melanoma, papillary thyroid carcinoma, pancreatic cancer, prostate cancer, and breast cancer (Molloy et al., 2011). Indeed, in lung cancer (Gomez et al., 2018), head and neck cancer (Jiang et al., 2017), and esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (Gomez et al., 2018), BDNF/TrkB/PI3K-AKT seem to be activated and linked to invasiveness (Figure ​Figure3B3B). As mentioned above, BDNF/p75NTR/PI3K-AKT activate Par3 blocking the Par3 effect (as a negative regulator) on RhoA pathway leading to cytoskeleton remodeling and therefore inducing invasiveness. In clear cell renal carcinoma, it has been shown that invasiveness is independent of BDNF/TrkB signaling, but dependent on the high expression level of p75NTR working through proBDNF activation (De la Cruz-Morcillo et al., 2016, Figure ​Figure3B3B). So far, the link between proBDNF and Par3 has not been established; however, it is possible that proBDNF may indirectly act on Par3 leading to an opposite effect to the one described for the BDNF, similar to what we observed for p75NTR. Likewise, it was also shown that proBDNF induced cell migration through p75NTR/TrkB/sortilin leading to the activation of AKT and ERK pathways (De la Cruz-Morcillo et al., 2016, Figure ​Figure3A3A). In melanoma, a recent study characterized the interaction of NGF/p75NTR/TrkA signaling as a regulator of phenotype switching in melanoma (Restivo et al., 2017, Figure ​Figure4B4B). In this study, the authors described p75NTR as a key effector to drive the melanoma cells to become highly invasive (Restivo et al., 2017). Likewise, in thyroid cancer cells, proNGF works through p75NTR/TrkA/sortilin leading to SRC signaling pathway activation and cell invasion (Faulkner et al., 2018, Figure ​Figure4B4B).

Beside Par3, other CIL contributors are also necessary for cancer progression. Indeed, it has been described that ephrin-B signaling gives rise to CIL in carcinoma cell lines and can induce high levels of CIL behavior (Roycroft and Mayor, 2016). Likewise, it was demonstrated that ephrin-B4 receptor signaling contributes to the high migratory ability of invasive melanoma cells by influencing RhoA-mediated actin cytoskeleton reorganization (Yang et al., 2006, Figure ​Figure3B3B). Similarly, ephrin-B2 and ephrin-B3 expression and phosphorylation correlated with increasing tumor grade and its signaling through Rac1 was critically important to glioma invasion (Nakada et al., 2006, 2010, Figure ​Figure3B3B).

Currently, the molecular pathways underlying the role of p75NTR in cancer cell migration and invasion is not fully understood; however, multiple clues in several cancers linked p75NTR to tumor cell migration and invasion. Indeed, proBDNF has been described as inducing renal cell carcinoma cell survival and migration, through p75NTR (De la Cruz-Morcillo et al., 2016). In the same line, proNGF is associated with the invasion and migration of melanoma cells through a mechanism involving p75NTR and sortilin (Truzzi et al., 2008). Likewise, Shonukan et al. (2003) showed that the activation of p75NTR with NGF or proNGF induced melanoma cell migration and increased the level of expression of p75NTR (Shonukan et al., 2003). Moreover, the effects of NGF and proNGF through p75NTR were correlated with the late stages and the invasive potential of melanoma brain metastasis (Shonukan et al., 2003, Figure ​Figure4B4B).

p75NTR was also correlated with a poor prognosis in human hypopharyngeal cancer (HPC) as Mochizuki and collaborators indicated that p75NTR initiated tumor formation by the activation of Erk-signaling leading to an acceleration of the migration signaling pathway (Mochizuki et al., 2016, Figure ​Figure4B4B). Likewise, in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, p75NTR overexpression and PI3K/AKT signaling pathway activation induced invasion and migration (Xi et al., 2016, Figure ​Figure3B3B). Likewise, Gomez et al. (2018) demonstrated that in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, invasiveness was linked to BDNF/TrkB/PI3K-AKT (Figure ​Figure3B3B).

In glioma, several cell lines characterized as brain tumor-initiating cells (BTIC) have been established by culturing cells derived from patient tumors. Using those cell lines, several studies demonstrated that the NGF stimulates BTIC proliferation through a p75NTR cleavage. Interestingly, ectopic expression of p75NTR-ICD was sufficient by itself to stimulate BTIC cell invasion and proliferation (reviewed by Chopin et al., 2016). Moreover, p75NTR-ICD was able to induce AKT activation in BTIC (Forsyth et al., 2014). Likewise, Berghoff and collaborators also indicated that p75NTR undergoes a γ-secretase-mediated regulated intramembrane proteolysis and was involved in glioblastoma cell migration and invasion (Berghoff et al., 2015). More recently, Alshehri and collaborators indicated that p75NTR was a central regulator of glioma invasion (Alshehri et al., 2017). These observations correlate with a study indicating that PDLIM1, a novel signaling adaptor for p75NTR, was shown to interact with p75NTR in highly invasive patient-derived glioma stem cells/tumor-initiating cells (Ahn et al., 2016). Moreover, silencing PDLIM1 (a member of the PDZ and LIM protein family) in vitro and in vivo resulted in a complete ablation of p75NTR-mediated invasion (Ahn et al., 2016).

In medulloblastoma (MB), the most aggressive brain tumor in children, it has been reported that p75NTR expression is correlated with cell invasion and migration (Wang et al., 2015). Indeed, in human MB cell lines, p75NTR was shed by α-secretase first to generate ECD and the carboxy-terminal fragment, which was still anchored in the membrane, was then cleaved by γ-secretase to generate an ICD. This p75NTR proteolytic processing was required for p75NTR-mediated MB invasion in vitro and in vivo (Wang et al., 2015, Figure ​Figure3B3B).

All these cancer studies revealed a strong implication of p75NTR in cell migration and invasion that seems to be induced through multiple pathways. This observation is even reinforced by the fact that besides NTs and coreceptors that have been linked to migration and invasions, other effectors may also induce cell migration and invasion through p75NTR. In fact, cell migration and invasion have also been reported to be activated by p75NTR through a protein scaffold like Kidins220 or a p75NTR modulator like NRAGE.

Currently, there is growing evidence showing the involvement of Kidins220/ARMS in various cancers (Raza et al., 2017). As mentioned above, Kidins220/ARMS is a multifunctional transmembrane scaffold protein involved in the regulation of many cellular functions. The most significant role identified for Kidins220/ARMS is as a downstream substrate of NT receptors (Cai et al., 2017). Kidins220 appeared to be phosphorylated following exposure to ephrin-B, suggesting a role downstream of ephrin receptors (Cai et al., 2017). Kidins220/ARMS has also been reported to mediate melanoma cell migration and invasion through activation of ERK/MEK signaling pathways (Liao et al., 2011, Figure ​Figure4B4B). Moreover, the NGF and the BDNF have been shown to modulate the Kidins220/ARMS expression level (Schmieg et al., 2015) and its overexpression drastically induced TrkA expression (Schmieg et al., 2015). As mentioned above, TrkA and p75NTR overexpression have been linked to migration of several cancer cells like in thyroid cancer (Faulkner et al., 2018) or in pancreatic cancers (Bapat et al., 2016). As Kidins220/ARMS is also able to interact with TrkB and TrkC, it is possible that Kidins220/ARMS overexpression could also modulate the TrkB and TrkC level of expression depending on the type of NT induction; however, it has not been investigated so far (Figure ​Figure3B3B).

Similarly to Kidins220/ARMS, numerous efforts have been made to dissect the relationship between NRAGE and tumorigenesis (Zhang et al., 2016). NRAGE also known as MAGE-D1 or Dlxin-1 plays crucial roles in regulating tumorigenesis and metastasis, as its downregulation is associated with metastasis formation in a variety of tumor cells including pancreatic cancer, low-grade gastric cancer, and ovarian cancer (Zhang et al., 2016). NRAGE is known to inhibit cell migration through its interaction with E-cadherin. Indeed, E-cadherin is known as a cell–cell adhesion molecule that inhibits motility through its interactions with α-catenin, β-catenin, and p120-catenin as well as with ankyrin-G (Cai et al., 2014). The α-catenin and β-catenin link also the actin filaments of the cytoskeleton. When the interactions between E-cadherin and catenin are broken, β-catenin is released in its phosphorylated state. Phosphorylated β-catenin is then transferred from the cytoplasm into the nucleus, where it interacts with transcription factors. Ankyrin-G is known to interact with the cytoskeleton through spectrin and actin complexes and with the plasma membrane, through diverse transmembrane proteins including E-cadherin (Frisch et al., 2013). Ankyrin-G has also been shown to sequester NRAGE in the cytoplasm (Kumar et al., 2011). In the absence of ankyrin-G (i.e., after the loss of E-cadherin following EMT), a fraction of NRAGE translocates to the nucleus, where it has been shown to interact with the oncogenic transcriptional repressor protein TBX2 (Kumar et al., 2011). TBX2 has been described as a strong inducer of EMT leading to tumor progression from non-invasive to invasive malignant states (Wang et al., 2012).

So far, NRAGE overexpression has been described as playing a role in migration and invasion of breast cancer (Wang et al., 2012), hepatocellular carcinoma (Shimizu et al., 2016), and high-grade gastric cancer (Kanda and Kodera, 2016). As previously mentioned, in breast cancer, cell migration and invasion are linked to TrkA/ERK/p38 MAP kinase pathways (Lagadec et al., 2009, Figure ​Figure4B4B). Likewise, cadherin-11/p75NTR/Rho-A and Par3 alternative splicing seem to be also implicated in breast cancer migration and invasion (Figure ​Figure3B3B). On the other hand, in gastric cancer, p75NTR has been reported to inhibit the invasive and metastatic abilities of low-grade cancer cells by suppressing the NFkappaB signal transduction pathway potentially through p75-ICD and NRAGE interaction (Jin et al., 2007). However, in high-grade gastric cancer, cellular migration and invasion are mediated through EZH2, COX-2, MCL-1, and FOS genes. Interestingly, EZH2 (the polycomb repressor complex 2 molecule) is known to interact with the TrkA promotor and modulate TrkA silencing (Li et al., 2018).

Figure 3
p75NTR and TrkB pathways leading to migration and invasion in normal and pathological conditions. As described in this figure, several signal pathways are preferentially activated in cell invasion and migration processes involving p75NTR upon NT activation. From the left to the right: (1) ephrin-B receptor phosphorylate Kidins220/ARMS leading to p75NTR/TrkB activation (Neubrand et al., 2012; Cai et al., 2017) and increasing their sensitivity to BDNF, leading to the activation of MAPkinase signaling pathways (Liao et al., 2011). Ephrin-B receptor activation is also linked to STAT3 and RhoA signaling leading to cytoskeleton remodeling (Marler et al., 2010; Neubrand et al., 2012). (2) In the absence of Kidins220/ARMS, p75NTR/TrkB could interact with other scaffold proteins like Par3 (Moore et al., 2013; Gomez et al., 2018). In this context, the BDNF activates p75NTR/TrkB leading to AKT pathway activation, but also to Par3 activation (Gomez et al., 2018). Activated Par3 activates Rac1, which modifies cadherin-11 interaction with catenins leading to cytoskeleton remodeling (Moore et al., 2013). (3) In some cases, p75NTR/TrkB also interact with sortilin leading to a high sensitivity to proBDNF. ProBDNF/p75NTR/TrkB also activate AKT pathway (De la Cruz-Morcillo et al., 2016). (A) Information collected from NCC migration and invasion during the development. (B) Information collected from cancer studies (highlighted in blue). Orange and blue borders = information related to both situations, NCC and cancer cells migration and invasion.