PI3K-AKT/PKB signaling pathway
Recently, studies have focused on the mechanism behind inulin-mediated fat and glucose metabolism, though few have investigated protein metabolism (13). For instance, it has been reported that hyperglycemia promoted compensatory β-cell proliferation to meet the insulin demand induced by hyperglycemia (27). Lipid metabolism has previously been investigated in pregnant female mice (10), whereby mice were randomly assigned to receive either a high-fat diet (MO-HF) or standard chow (MO-SC) without advance preparation. It was observed that MO-HF induced a failure in β-cell proliferation and survival by downregulating IRS1, PI3K and GLUT2 protein, while upregulating insulin protein and FOXO1 when compared with MO-SC mice (10,27). Furthermore, a high-fat diet has been demonstrated to negatively impact on β-cell proliferation, leading to the development of insulin resistance and D2M characteristics (28,29). Rhee et al (30) also suggested that preadipocyte factor 1 (Pref-1) may independently stimulate insulin secretion via AKT-Rab43 (Fig. 2). Finally, there has been dispute regarding the interplay between protein metabolism and the related signaling pathways of β-cell proliferation. Chen et al (13) argued that FOXO1 may inhibit the expression of albumin, while other proteins such as phycocyanin have been demonstrated to promote β-cell proliferation by regulating PI3K-AKT signaling and downstream FOXO1, and ameliorate diabetes mice by stimulating glucokinase expression and insulin signaling in the pancreas (11,31). It has also been reported that Exendin-4 may enhance β-cell proliferation in some instances by stimulating PI3K-AKT signaling, potentially via an intermediate ligand-binding activation step involving corresponding receptors (14).

Calcium-mediated signaling pathway
As an important second messenger, calcium participates in apoptosis and regulates the synthesis of enzymes and hormones, including that of insulin. The maintenance of normal Ca2+ concentration in the body is termed calcium homeostasis, and is critical to cell survival (32). Previous results have indicated that disruption of calcium homeostasis may accelerate β-cell death and lead to type 1 diabetes mellitus (D1M) (32). Furthermore, PI3K signaling stimulated the autocrine function of pancreatic β-cells to moderate β-cell proliferation by inhibiting endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase, which increased the intracellular Ca2+ concentration and subsequently activated calcium-mediated signaling pathways (33,34). In calcium-mediated signaling, increases in intracellular calcium activate calmodulin (CaM), which has two substrates, namely carbohydrate response element-binding (CREB)-regulated transcription coactivator-2 (CRTC2) and transcription factors of the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) family (35–38). Notably, dephosphorylated NFAT translocated to the nucleus and combined with the promoters of cell-cycle activating agents, including cyclin A and D, cMyc, cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) 2 and 4, FOX protein M1 (FOXM1; Fig. 2) and the promoter of IRS-2, which participated in PI3K-AKT and Ras-Raf-MAPK signaling to activate β-cell proliferation (35–37). By contrast, NFAT function may be improved by interaction with transcription factors, including CREB, cAMP-response element modulator and activator protein 1 (38). Changes in cytosolic Ca2+ concentration have been documented to exert a significant effect on insulin secretion by modulating gene expression from electrically excitable pancreatic β-cells (39). In pancreatic β-cells, intracellular high calcium concentration triggers exocytosis and leads to insulin secretion (40). In addition, previous data suggest that Ca2+ may be drawn into pancreatic islets either by the opening L-type voltage-dependent Ca2+ channels or crosstalk between intracellular Ca2+ concentration and protein kinase (PK) A/L/C to stimulate insulin secretion (40,41). Indeed, Ca2+/CaM-dependent protein kinase 2 (CaMKK2) is considered to be a molecular regulator of insulin function, and Ca2+/CaM/CaMKK2 has been documented to serve a crucial role in the modulation of holistic body metabolism (42,43). Collectively these observations indicate that calcium-mediated signaling pathways may be therapeutic targets for the modulation of β-cell proliferation in diabetes.

RAS-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)/MAPK signaling pathway
Three types of Ras protein are expressed in humans, namely H-Ras, K-Ras, and N-Ras. K-Ras is considered to be the most important form, acting as a downstream target of multiple cellular signaling pathways that regulate cell growth, proliferation and differentiation (44). Chamberlain et al (45) demonstrated that K-Ras stimulated the anti-proliferative ras association domain family 1A (Rasf1a) pathway, which diminished cell proliferation (Fig. 2). Therefore, K-Ras may serve a negative regulatory role in the proliferation of β-cells, and downregulation of the K-Ras gene may enhance proliferation by reducing Rassf1a activity.

ERKs (also known as classical MAPKs), are diffusely expressed cellular signaling molecules that participate in the modulation of cell proliferation (46). In pancreatic β-cells, ERK1 (MAPK3) and ERK2 (MAPK1) have been documented to be the major expressed forms of ERK (5). In general, the binding of a ligand to its cognate tyrosine kinase or G protein coupled receptor stimulates the small GTPase Ras, resulting in the formation of activated Ras-GTP, which phosphorylates c-Raf and subsequently activates MEK, and ultimately activates ERK1/2 (5). Furthermore, a number of growth factors and hormones have been reported to induce β-cell proliferation via the activation of ERK1/2. For instance, it was observed that stimulation of platelet derived growth factor receptor required activated ERK1/2, leading to upregulation of the polycomb group protein EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2, EZH2), inhibition of P16LINK4 tumor suppressor protein and ultimately adult β-cell expansion (Fig. 1) (47). ERK signaling was also demonstrated to serve a pivotal role in 3,5,3′-Triidothyronine (T3)-induced β-cell proliferation (Fig. 2) (46). In addition, reactive oxygen species-facilitated β-cell differentiation by regulating the ERK1/2 pathway (48), and the anti-apoptotic function of visfatin was mediated by stimulation of the ERK1/2 signaling pathway (49). In a study by Ozaki et al (50), a mouse model of diabetes was established in high-fat diet KKAy mice and leptin receptor-deficient (db/db) mice. In these mice it was observed that obesity-associated insulin resistance could be treated with an inhibitor of MEK (50), indicating that regulation of ERK signaling may be an effective treatment for type 2 diabetes (D2M).

TGFβ superfamily signaling pathway
Various members of the TGFβ superfamily, including TGFβ, inhibins, activins, follistains, mullerian inhibitor substance and bone morphogenetic proteins, have been demonstrated to function in β-cells (5), though the exact underlying mechanisms remain unclear. The TGFβ superfamily, which has been implicated in numerous developmental processes, including proliferation, differentiation and growth arrest, served a crucial role in modulating pancreatic endocrine development and maturation (61–64). In particular, interplay between the inhibitor TGFβ signaling Smad7 and intracellular mediators of TGFβ signaling were involved in coordinating this process (61). A recent investigation into TGFβ signaling demonstrated that macrophages released TGFβ1 to trigger Smad7 expression, which then facilitated β-cell proliferation (65). Smad7 was also increased in β-cells after partial pancreatic duct ligation (PDL) (65). In general, the functions of TGFβ superfamily members affects downstream Smad proteins in β-cells, which typically suppresses proliferation (64). Therefore, suppression of TGFβ signaling may promote β-cell proliferation (65–70). In cultured human pancreatic duct cells, TGFβ1 induced the epithelial-mesenchymal transition and inhibited differentiation into β-cells, and bound with the downstream targets ERK1/2, AKT and Ras (71). The underlying mechanisms of pancreatic islet cell expansion may involve an upregulation in TGFβ signaling (68). Blockade of TGFβ signaling with short hairpin RNA (shRNA) against TGFβ1R, such as Alk5 shRNA, suppressed the differentiation and proliferation of β-cell-derived (BCD) cells, which may be associated with the AKT-FOXO1 pathway (Fig. 2) (72).

PLGF and Pref-1 signaling pathway
Finally, gestational PLGF may stimulate endothelial cells within the pancreatic islets to release growth factors that activate the PI3K-AKT pathway (Fig. 2), thus enhancing β-cell proliferation (73). A previous study demonstrated that Pref-1 independently facilitated the phosphorylation of AKT and ERK1/2, and triggered alterations in the expression of FOXO1 and Pdx1 (Fig. 2) (29).

Figure 2
Binding of growth factors and hormones to their respective receptors or ligands serves a pivotal role in β-cell proliferation. K-Ras is a principal regulator of β-cell proliferation through its mediation of B-Raf-ERK and Rasf1a. CRTC2 and NFAT combine with the promoters of cell-cycle activating agents, including cyclins A and D, cMyc, cdk2/4 and FOXM (a member of the FOX family of transcription factors), and participate in AKT signaling to activate β-cell proliferation. Circles of the same color represent signals within the same pathway. Red and black lines indicate inhibition and promotion, respectively. CaM, calmodulin; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T cells; CRTC2; carbohydrate response element-binding-regulated transcription coactivator-2; cdk, cyclin-dependent kinase; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase; PLGF, placental growth factor; PLGFR, placental growth factor receptor; TGFβ1; transforming growth factor β1; TGFβ1R; transforming growth factor β1 receptor; Pref1, preadipocyte factor 1; Pref1R, preadipocyte factor 1 receptor; TH, thyroid hormone; TRs, TH receptors; T3, 3,5,3′-Triidothyronine; FOXO1, forkhead box protein O1; Pdx1, pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1; EZH2, enhancer of zeste homolog 2; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; IGF-1, insulin-like growth factor 1; RTK, receptor tyrosine kinase; Ras, rat sarcomas.